



Network Working Group                                        G. D. Marco
Internet-Draft               Dipartimento per la trasformazione digitale
Intended status: Informational                                 F. Marino
Expires: 13 June 2024           Istituto Poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato
                                                        11 December 2023


                       OAuth Status Attestations
                draft-demarco-status-attestations-latest

Abstract

   Status Attestations play a vital role in affirming the validity of
   digital credentials or tokens, supporting privacy preservation and
   offline use cases.  Status Attestations act as evidence that a
   specific credential or token, whether in JSON Web Tokens (JWT)
   [RFC7519] or CBOR Web Tokens (CWT) format [RFC8392], has not been
   revoked and remains valid.  These attestations are designed to be
   short-lived and statically provided to verifiers, eliminating the
   need for verifiers to obtain additional information from third-party
   systems.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://peppelinux.github.io/draft-demarco-status-attestations/draft-
   demarco-status-attestations.html.  Status information for this
   document may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
   demarco-status-attestations/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/peppelinux/draft-demarco-status-attestations.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 13 June 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Terminology
   4.  Rationale
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  Normative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Status Attestations play a crucial role in maintaining the integrity
   and trustworthiness of token and digital credentials.  Status
   Attestations serve as proof that a particular digital credential or
   token, whether in JSON Web Tokens (JWT) or CBOR Web Tokens (CWT)
   format, has not been revoked and is still valid.

   In many scenarios, a digital credential may be presented to a
   verifier long after it has been issued.  During this interval, the
   credential could potentially be invalidated for various reasons.  To
   ensure the credential's validity, the issuer provides a short-lived
   Status Attestation to the credential's Holder.  This attestation is
   bound to the credential and can be presented to a verifier, along
   with the credential itself, as proof of the credential's non-
   revocation status.

   Status Attestations are designed to be privacy-preserving and secure.
   These attestations are essential for enabling offline use cases and
   ensuring the security of the digital credential system.  They provide
   a balance between scalability, security, and privacy by minimizing
   the status information.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Terminology

   Issuer:  An entity that ...

   Relying Party:  An entity that.... Also known as Verifier.

   Wallet Instance:  An entity that.... Also known as Wallet.

   Attestation Owner:  An entity that.... Also known as Wallet.

4.  Rationale

   Status Lists [@!I-D.looker-oauth-jwt-cwt-status-list] indeed exist
   and are quite effective for certain use cases, particularly when the
   Verifier, Credential Issuer, and Status List Provider all belong to
   the same domain or operate within a context where a high level of
   trust exists between them and the End-User, mitigating any privacy
   concerns, like the ones listed below:

   *  A Status List provider may know which list is linked to which
      Credential Issuer and this latter may only issue a single
      Credential type, exposing the evidence to the Status List provider
      of which list is related to which credential;

   *  A Verifier, or Relying Party, queries a Status List using a TCP/IP
      connection with a Status List provider.  The Status List provider
      then may have the IP address of the requestor and both the
      Credential type and the Credential Issuer linked to that specific
      Status List.  A malicious Status List provider may use internet
      diagnostic tools, such as the Whois and/or the GeoIP lookup, to
      gather informations about the requestor.  This exposes to the
      Status List provider information about which Credential the
      requestor is consuming from which Credential Issuer, while this
      information, in some cases, must not be provided.

   However, Status Attestations differ significantly from Status Lists
   in several ways:

   1.  *Privacy*: Status Attestations are designed to be privacy-
       preserving.  They do not require the Verifier to gather any
       additional information from third-party systems, thus preventing
       potential privacy leaks.

   2.  *Static Verification*: Status Attestations are designed to be
       statically provided to Verifiers by Wallet Instance (Attestation
       Owner).  This means that once an Attestation is issued, it can be
       verified without any further communication with the Issuer or any
       other party.  In contrast, Status Lists may require dynamic
       checks or updates, which could involve additional communication
       with the Status List Provider.

   3.  *Token Formats*: Status Attestations are suitable for both JSON
       Web Tokens (JWT) and CBOR Web Tokens (CWT), making them versatile
       for different use cases.  Status Lists, however, may not support
       all token formats.

   4.  *Trust Model*: Status Attestations operate under a model where
       the Verifier trusts the Issuer to provide accurate status
       information.  In contrast, Status Lists operate under a model
       where the Verifier trusts the Status List Provider to maintain an
       accurate and up-to-date list of token statuses.

5.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7519]  Jones, M., Bradley, J., and N. Sakimura, "JSON Web Token
              (JWT)", RFC 7519, DOI 10.17487/RFC7519, May 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7519>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8392]  Jones, M., Wahlstroem, E., Erdtman, S., and H. Tschofenig,
              "CBOR Web Token (CWT)", RFC 8392, DOI 10.17487/RFC8392,
              May 2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8392>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Giuseppe De Marco
   Dipartimento per la trasformazione digitale
   Email: gi.demarco@innovazione.gov.it


   Francesco Marino
   Istituto Poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato
   Email: fa.marino@ipzs.it
